To get the exlosion effect, one must make use of Unity's particle systems. There are essentially two particle systems at work here, one for the explosion and an additional for the smoke effect. For the explosion and smoke, we would need to have some material that replicates the explosion effect and smoke. For this, I made use of the Unity particle pack and used a textured sheet animation from a fire explosion material and dust material. Starting with a basic particle system, we can check the renderer and add the material there. There will be a module that let's us edit the textured animation sheets and from there we can turn it on and set it up so that it will show the correct images, both the fire explosion and smoke being 6x6 tiles, which we set it to. Otherwise, we'll get the entire textured sheet to be displayed instead of each individual image. With this set, the effects are ready to be modified and altered to achieve the effect we're looking for. 
For the explosion, we should set the shape off and keep it natrually occurring. Next, we would want to keep it set to just one explosion so we would set the maximum amount of particles to 1 in the main settings of the particle. Here, we can also zero the start speed too in order to keep it stable and centered. In the emmission module, we would want to zero the rate over time and add a burst effect, keeping the minimum and maximum at 1. After thatwe can edit the simulation speed and duration of the explosion to your liking. Additionally, the color over lifetime can be adjusted depending on the effect you're dealing with, but just know that the module lets you literally change the color over the lifetime of your effect. Also, if you were to use the shape module, changing the shape to sphere would be the way to go since it gives the most realistic effect of an explosion than any other shapes. Changing the velocity over lifetime affects the speed of your particle over time and dampens it an arbitrary value. Finally, the size over lifetime module can be altered to just make the effect smaller or bigger over its lifetime depending on the effect you want. I wanted a small controlled explosion so I ended up removing and altering features here and then until I got the effect I wanted.
For the smoke, we would have a similar approach. First, we want to adjust the angle of the particles so they move upwards an do this in their transform settings, and also make the maximum amount of particles something reasonable like 50. Then, we would change the emmission module to be 0 for the rate over time and once again set the burst option, minimum and maximum set at 50 or whichever max particles you have set. To give randomness for the smoke, we will then add a random between two constants in the start speed and edit there as needed. I set mine to 0 and 1 which will tell Unity to choose a random value between 0 and 1. After that, we can do the same to the start lifetime and I set my values to 2 and 3. Once again, to achieive an even more natural feel to the smoke, we can set the start rotation to a random value from -180 to 180 using the same option as before. Next, we can edit the shape to be either cone or spehere. I set mine to cone and made the base small with a wide angle. Either way, we're setting the smoke to appear as though it's coming out of the explosion so be sure to adjust the position with the explosion's. Now we should modify the color over lifetime module so that we can get a more realistic look. I set my color to start off dark and get a little lighter over time, having a dark gray turn into just gray. Lastly, I turned on force over lifetime and set the z axis to be random between two constants from .5 to 1 so that the smoke rises. 
With all of this combined, there should be a repeating explosion with some smoke surrounding it. Last edits I made were to cut looping from both effects to just get the one explosion effect I want, and editing the duration of the explosion and smoke. I let the smoke have a longer duration than the explosion so that their times were more in sync. Depending on the look you want of the effect, you can change the texture sheet animation or edit the render options, as well as modifying the particle itself. Last note would be to make sure that cast shadows recieve shadows is off always since we are really creating light and don't want that effect. Overall, explosions are a burst of particles that fade away over time while changing colors, from a bright light, to dark red, and ending off with a black smoke.
